What is Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)?

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is a technique that combines information retrieval with large language model (LLM) generation. Instead of relying solely on the LLM's training data, RAG retrieves relevant documents from a knowledge base at query time and includes them in the prompt.

This approach solves two major problems with vanilla LLMs: hallucination (generating plausible-sounding but incorrect information) and knowledge cutoff (the model doesn't know about events after its training date).

The RAG Pipeline

A typical RAG pipeline has five stages:

1. Document Loading — Read source documents (PDFs, text files, web pages) and split them into smaller chunks. Smaller chunks (200–500 words) retrieve more precisely than large ones.

2. Embedding — Convert each chunk into a numerical vector (embedding) using an embedding model. Semantically similar text produces similar vectors.

3. Storage — Store the vectors in a vector database (e.g. ChromaDB, Pinecone, Weaviate). The database indexes the vectors for fast similarity search.

4. Retrieval — When a user asks a question, convert the question to a vector and search the database for the most similar chunks. Return the top-k results.

5. Generation — Build a prompt that includes the retrieved chunks as context and send it to an LLM. The model generates an answer grounded in the retrieved content.

What is ChromaDB?

ChromaDB is an open-source vector database designed for AI applications. It stores document chunks alongside their vector embeddings and metadata, and provides fast nearest-neighbour search.

Key ChromaDB concepts:
- Collection: a named group of documents (like a table in a relational database)
- Document: the raw text content of a chunk
- Embedding: the vector representation of a document (ChromaDB can compute these automatically)
- Metadata: arbitrary key-value pairs attached to a document (e.g. source filename, page number)
- Distance: how similar two vectors are — lower distance means higher similarity

Creating and querying a ChromaDB collection:
    import chromadb
    client = chromadb.PersistentClient(path="./rag_db")
    collection = client.get_or_create_collection("documents")

    # Add documents
    collection.add(documents=["Hello world"], ids=["doc1"])

    # Query
    results = collection.query(query_texts=["greeting"], n_results=1)

What is Ollama?

Ollama is a tool for running large language models locally on your own hardware. It provides a REST API compatible with OpenAI's chat completions format, so applications built for OpenAI can switch to local models with minimal changes.

Ollama's /api/chat endpoint accepts a list of messages and returns a completion:
    POST http://localhost:11434/api/chat
    {
        "model": "llama3.2:1b",
        "messages": [
            {"role": "system", "content": "You are a helpful assistant."},
            {"role": "user",   "content": "What is Python?"}
        ],
        "stream": false
    }

Setting stream to false returns the full response in a single JSON object, which is simpler to handle than streaming responses.

Confidence Scoring in RAG

ChromaDB returns a distance score for each retrieved chunk. The distance measures how different the chunk's vector is from the query vector. Common distance metrics include:
- L2 (Euclidean distance): 0 is a perfect match, higher is less similar
- Cosine distance: 0 is identical, 1 is completely different

You can use the distance score to estimate answer confidence:
- Distance < 0.5: high confidence — very similar content found
- Distance 0.5–1.0: medium confidence — somewhat related content
- Distance > 1.0: low confidence — no closely matching content found

RAG Guardrails

Guardrails are checks that make RAG systems more reliable:
- Confidence threshold: reject answers when no chunk is close enough to the query
- No-context fallback: return a safe "I don't know" response instead of hallucinating
- Answer validation: check that the response cites actual sources from the retrieved chunks
- Input sanitisation: strip or reject queries that are too short, too long, or contain injection attempts
